docs: Custom OTTL with OpenTelemetry-based Telemetry Pipelines (#1520)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/016-transform-filter-support-for-telemetry-pipelines.md

Example configuration MetricPipeline:
    
```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: MetricPipeline
metadata:
  name: metricpipeline-sample
spec:
  transform:
    conditions:
      - type == METRIC_DATA_TYPE_SUM
    statements:
      - set(description, "Sum")
  filter:
    metric:
        - type == METRIC_DATA_TYPE_NONE
    datapoint:
        - metric.name == "k8s.pod.phase" and value_int == 4
  input:
      istio:
        enabled: true
      prometheus:
        enabled: false
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: ingest-otlp.services.sap.hana.ondemand.com:443
```

Example configuration TracePipeline:

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: TracePipeline
metadata:
  name: tracepipeline-sample
spec:
  transform:
    statements:
        - set(status.code, 1) where attributes["http.path"] == "/health"
  filter:
    span:
      - IsMatch(resource.attributes["k8s.pod.name"], "my-pod-name.*")
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: ingest-otlp.services.sap.hana.ondemand.com:443
      protocol: grpc
```
### Solution

> The OTTL library offers functions to validate, filter, and transform data by parsing and executing expressions. To ensure robustness and stability, we will limit the available filter and transform functions to a carefully selected subset. This subset will be curated based on common use cases, ensuring essential functionality without overcomplicating the configuration process, the OTTL library provides two categories of functions, the editor functions and the converters.

Reviewer: there are two flavours of functions:
editor functions and converters. The ADR goes into more detail for the editor functions, but does not go into detail for converters. will the be 
- fully supported
- partially supported
- not supported?

> The editor functions used to modify the data, while the converters are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to be able to compare it with the expected value. The current existing pipelines using a small subset of OTTL functions like setting a value, adding or removing attributes, and filtering data based on conditions. The solution will use this subset of editor functions to provide the necessary functionality to the users, the additional functions when necessary can be added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The editor functions used to modify the data, while the converters are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to be able to compare it with the expected value. The current existing pipelines use a small subset of OTTL functions like setting a value, adding or removing attributes, and filtering data based on conditions. The solution will use this subset of editor functions to provide the necessary functionality to the users, the additional functions when necessary can be added.
```

> The editor functions used to modify the data, while the converters are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to be able to compare it with the expected value. The current existing pipelines using a small subset of OTTL functions like setting a value, adding or removing attributes, and filtering data based on conditions. The solution will use this subset of editor functions to provide the necessary functionality to the users, the additional functions when necessary can be added.

Reviewer: can we already provide a list (not necessarily complete) of the functions?

Example configuration MetricPipeline:
    
```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: MetricPipeline
metadata:
  name: metricpipeline-sample
spec:
  transform:
    conditions:
      - type == METRIC_DATA_TYPE_SUM
    statements:
      - set(description, "Sum")
  filter:
    metric:
        - type == METRIC_DATA_TYPE_NONE
    datapoint:
        - metric.name == "k8s.pod.phase" and value_int == 4
  input:
      istio:
        enabled: true
      prometheus:
        enabled: false
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: ingest-otlp.services.sap.hana.ondemand.com:443
```

Example configuration TracePipeline:

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: TracePipeline
metadata:
  name: tracepipeline-sample
spec:
  transform:
    statements:
        - set(status.code, 1) where attributes["http.path"] == "/health"
  filter:
    span:
      - IsMatch(resource.attributes["k8s.pod.name"], "my-pod-name.*")
  output:
    otlp:
      endpoint:
        value: ingest-otlp.services.sap.hana.ondemand.com:443
      protocol: grpc
```
### Solution

> The OTTL library offers functions to validate, filter, and transform data by parsing and executing expressions. To ensure robustness and stability, we will limit the available filter and transform functions to a carefully selected subset. This subset will be curated based on common use cases, ensuring essential functionality without overcomplicating the configuration process. The OTTL library provides two categories of functions, the [editor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl/ottlfuncs#editors) functions and the [converters](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl/ottlfuncs#converters).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OTTL library offers functions to validate, filter, and transform data by parsing and executing expressions. To ensure robustness and stability, we will limit the available filter and transform functions to a carefully selected subset. This subset will be curated based on common use cases, ensuring essential functionality without overcomplicating the configuration process. The OTTL library provides two categories of functions: the [editor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl/ottlfuncs#editors) functions and the [converters](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl/ottlfuncs#converters).
```

> The editor functions are used to modify the data, while the converters are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to be able to compare it with the expected value. The current existing pipelines use a small subset of OTTL functions like setting a value, adding or removing attributes, and filtering data based on conditions. The solution will use this subset of editor functions to provide the necessary functionality to the users, the additional functions when required can be added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The editor functions are used to modify the data. The current pipelines use a small subset of OTTL functions like setting a value, adding or removing attributes, and filtering data based on conditions. We will use this subset of editor functions to provide the necessary functionality to the users. If needed, other functions can be added.
- The converter functions are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to compare it with the expected value. They support a broad variety of data types, including xml, json, and string. We probably only need basic operation like string comparison, formatting and data type checks. 

```

> - The converter functions are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to compare it with the expected value. They support a broad variety of data types, including xml, json, and string. We probably only need basic operation like string comparison, formatting and data type checks. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The converter functions are used in the OTTL condition expressions to convert the data type to compare it with the expected value. They support a broad variety of data types, including XML, JSON, and string. We probably only need basic operations like string comparison, formatting, and data type checks. 
```

> The converter functions support a broad variety of data types, including xlm, json, and string; not all of these functions are required for the current use cases, basic operation like string comparison, formatting and data type checks could be sufficient. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The converter functions support a broad variety of data types, including xml, json, and string; not all of these functions are required for the current use cases, basic operation like string comparison, formatting and data type checks could be sufficient. 
```
sorry, it took me too long to finally figure out what looked wrong all the time :)

> The converter functions support a broad variety of data types, including xml, json, and string; not all of these functions are required for the current use cases, basic operation like string comparison, formatting and data type checks could be sufficient. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The OTTL supports three types of error modes to handle errors in the OTTL expression execution:
- `ignore` : The processor ignores errors returned by conditions, logs them, and continues on to the next condition.
- `slient` : The processor ignores errors returned by conditions, does not log them, and continues on to the next condition.
- `propagate` : The processor returns the error up the pipeline. This will result in the payload being dropped from the collector.

> The recommended error mode is `ignore` and this will be used as default configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended error mode is `ignore`, and this will be used as the default configuration.
```

> The OTTL context will be embedded in the OTTL statements (in progress with [issue #29017](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/29017)) and will be available in the upcoming beta version. The solution will not implement the context as configuration parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OTTL context will be embedded in the OTTL statements (in progress with [issue #29017](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/29017)) and will be available in the upcoming beta version. The solution will not implement the context as a configuration parameter.
```

> The OTTL context will be embedded in the OTTL statements, [this is still in progress ](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/29017) and will be available in the upcoming beta version. The solution will not implement the context as configuration parameter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The OTTL context will be embedded in the OTTL statements (in progress with [issue #29017](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/29017)) and will be available in the upcoming beta version. The solution will not implement the context as configuration parameter.
```

> To ensure data consistency and sampling efficiency, the custom OTTL transformation and filtering processor will be end of the pipeline chain before exporters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure data consistency and sampling efficiency, the custom OTTL transformation and filtering processor will be near the end of the pipeline chain, before the exporters.
```

> The OTel configuration :

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the OTel configuration:
```

```yaml
service:
    pipelines:
        metrics/test-output:
            receivers:
                - routing/test
                - forward/test
            processors:
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-runtime
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-prometheus
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-istio
                - transform/set-instrumentation-scope-kyma
                - resource/insert-cluster-name
                - resource/delete-skip-enrichment-attribute
                - transform/custom-transform-processor
                - filter/custom-filter-processor
                - batch
            exporters:
                - otlp/test
```

### Risk

The OTTL library is still in its alpha phase, meaning that updates to the package may introduce breaking changes, including syntax and semantic updates or bugs. This poses a risk of disrupting running pipelines.

### Mitigation

To mitigate this risk, we suggest the following measures:
- The [beta version](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/28892) of the OTTL library will be used in the OTel Collector to ensure that the library is stable and reliable.

> - New Versions with Breaking Changes: New versions with [breaking changes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes) of the OTTL library will be rolled out with backward compatibility. This will help users adapt changes and reduce the chance of widespread disruption.

Reviewer 3: is this a measure _we_ can take? Do we make sure that new versions are rolled out with backward compatibility? The passive phrase "will be rolled out" doesn't indicate who takes care of that; or what our contribution to this mitigative action is.

Author: The point reworked

> - New Versions of OTTL with Breaking Changes: The breaking changes of the OTTL library are released with backward compatibility with following the process described [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes), the backward compatibility provided via `feature gates`, those `feature gates` are available over several releases. This helps us adapt the changes and reduce the chance of widespread disruption. There is an exception breaking changes with public Go API, the breaking changes with public Go API most likely will not follow the process described [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes). Since those changes are not end-user-faced changes and may require changes in our implementation uses the public API. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- New Versions of OTTL with Breaking Changes: The breaking changes of the OTTL library are released with backward compatibility following the [breaking changes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes) process. The backward compatibility is provided via `feature gates`. They are available in several releases. This helps us adapt to the changes and reduce the chance of widespread disruption. There are exceptional breaking changes with public Go API. These breaking changes most likely will not follow the breaking changes process. Since those changes are not end-user-faced, they may require changes in our implementation using the public API. 
```

> - New Versions of OTTL with Breaking Changes: The breaking changes of the OTTL library are released with backward compatibility with following the process described [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes), the backward compatibility provided via `feature gates`, those `feature gates` are available over several releases. This helps us adapt the changes and reduce the chance of widespread disruption. There is an exception breaking changes with public Go API, the breaking changes with public Go API most likely will not follow the process described [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes). Since those changes are not end-user-faced changes and may require changes in our implementation uses the public API. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can also add a link about the feature gates? Is [this link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/featuregate/README.md) the valid one?

Author: Yes, this is the right one and added to the doc

- Documentation: We will provide detailed documentation and practical examples of how to configure filter and transformation processors using OTTL expressions.
- Community Support: We will actively engage with the OpenTelemetry community to address any issues or concerns that arise from using the OTTL library.

> - The public Go API: The breaking changes most likely will not follow deprecation policy, this may require changes in our implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The public Go API: The breaking changes most likely will not follow deprecation policy. This may require changes in our implementation.
```
Not sure how this is a mitigation measure; it's just a statement. Why will the breaking changes (the ones from line 114, I assume?) not follow (which?) deprecation strategy? Which specific mitigative action does this require? Something like "We must design our implementation to cope with that." or "We must continuously monitor this and change our implementation accordingly"? or something similar?

Author: I removed this point from the mitigation, this is more a exception to mention

```yaml
service:
    pipelines:
        metrics/test-output:
            receivers:
                - routing/test
                - forward/test
            processors:
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-runtime
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-prometheus
                - filter/drop-if-input-source-istio
                - transform/set-instrumentation-scope-kyma
                - resource/insert-cluster-name
                - resource/delete-skip-enrichment-attribute
                - transform/custom-transform-processor
                - filter/custom-filter-processor
                - batch
            exporters:
                - otlp/test
```

### Risk

The OTTL library is still in its alpha phase, meaning that updates to the package may introduce breaking changes, including syntax and semantic updates or bugs. This poses a risk of disrupting running pipelines.

### Mitigation

To mitigate this risk, we suggest the following measures:
- The [beta version](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/28892) of the OTTL library will be used in the OTel Collector to ensure that the library is stable and reliable.

> - New Versions with Breaking Changes: The [breaking changes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes) of the OTTL library will be released with backward compatibility, the backward compatibility provided via `feature gates` and will be available over several releases. This will help users adapt changes and reduce the chance of widespread disruption.

Author: This point improved to make clear how the process works

- Thorough Testing: We will maintain strict version control of the OTTL library, ensuring that each update is thoroughly tested. Automated tests will validate that existing pipelines continue to work as expected.
- Documentation: We will provide detailed documentation and practical examples of how to configure filter and transformation processors using OTTL expressions.
- Community Support: We will actively engage with the OpenTelemetry community to address any issues or concerns that arise from using the OTTL library.

> > **NOTE:** The public Go API (not the user faced features), the breaking changes most likely will not follow deprecation policy, this may require changes in our implementation uses the public API.

Author: This moved to the breaking changes area and described as an exception
